Hello, kitty, kitty, kitty. Hello, kitty, kitty,
kitty. I'm going to get you to talk to me. When this
was all in, when, during the Depression, and when I
say Depression, that was back in the good old days.
I know. You had to do without your meat, your
sweets, and your sugar, and all that kind of stuff.
Your flour. What? And you, well, um, Her mother
always fixed graham biscuits for Uncle Sam, and
she actually didn't know any different, which is
great. And she thought everybody ate them. But
they didn't. And she'd come to our house, and we'd
have cornbread. And she didn't know what it was.
But old Lennon would say, I want some more. And we'd
have a mania night. All we'd have for supper would
be cornbread and what we call Friday gravy. And by
the way, we ate it. And a glass of milk, whether it
would be clabber or sweet milk or buttermilk. We
had that milk. But we had a very humble home. but one
that I wouldn't trade for all the modern ones in the
world. Mother sat at the foot of the table and Daddy
at the head. And we had a bench. In those days,
children sat on benches. And we all three sat on one
bench, right down this way. And the other part of
the table was pushed up against the wall. So we'd
have more room in the dining room. i was the first
one and then next was margaret and james was next to
mother he was the baby and she would see well our
plates were set by the side of dads and our knife and
fork and spoon and napkin and our napkin ring now we
had napkin rings and our napkins our napkins Nine
times out of ten were made out of flour sacks. But we
had a napkin. It wasn't made out of an old shirt tail
that hadn't wore out. But we had a napkin. We took
that napkin and we sat down and we unfolded it and
put it in our lap. And we put our hands down in our
lap. And our father asked the blessing. And then he
served our plate and we passed it down. James Ely
was served first, and then Margaret. I mean,
mother was served first, and then James, and then
Margaret and me. I was the last one, and my dad was
next to last to be served. No one picked up a fork and
started to dive in until everyone was served. And
then my father would always say, bless this food,
God, to the nourishment of our body and to our soul,
and help us to love our fellow man more dearly each
day. That was just clockwork. That's beautiful.
He'd already asked the blessing, but the food was
to be blessed for the nourishment of our body and
that we would live to love our fellow man. That's
beautiful. To me, I wouldn't take for it. And then
at night when we'd get ready for bed, It wasn't, go
on, go to bed. Get your things and get to bed. Get out
of here. I want to read or I want to listen. No.
Mother would sit in that old chair. I gave the chair
to Mark. But anyway, it was that old rocking chair.
And she'd be sitting in it. And she'd say, we always
had to hang our nightclothes. We had no closets on
the nail behind the door in our room. So we'd go in
there. and get our clothes off of the nail and dress
in our room, hang our clothes that we wore up on this
nail that we took our gown off of. It wouldn't be
laying on the floor, but they'd be hanging up
behind that door, because that room was going to be
straight. And we'd come back into Mama's room, and
she would gather us around her knee. And always, I
would be on the right, Margaret in the middle, and
James on the left. And she'd put her hand on each one
of us as we said our prayers. And it was now I lay me
down to sleep. But it was a real prayer. And we would
always, it didn't make any difference how bad we'd
been that day and how many whippings we'd got. Help
me to be a better girl tomorrow. Help me to
understand and mind my parents. That was
ritualistic.
That was ritualistic. Help me to mind my parents.
Honor thy father and thy mother that the days may be
long upon the earth which the Lord thy God giveth
thee. That was ritualistic.
And that's the reason I don't understand children
But it's home. It reverts back to home. And lots of
times, we'd sing. We'd sit around, and we'd sing
songs. And she would read the Bible and tell us
stories. Or she'd read a good story out of a lady's
home journal. Well, we had a pictorial review. and
a ladies home journal. Well, the pictorial review
come earlier, and we got ladies home journal much
later. And of course, we got a weekly newspaper.
San Antonio Express was a weekly newspaper. And we
didn't get mail here but three times a week. That's
the main thing. And we take what they call a little
old newspaper that was printed in Chicago called
The Grit. And it's still in publication. And it has
a lot of good reading in it today. Now, don't forget
that. Lots of good reading in today. And that would
come in our San Antonio Express weekly. Our
weekly. No telephone, no radios, and all we got was
by word or mouth from neighbors. That system of
telling who's done what, when, and how it's going.
And come by to see you. And I think, well, there was a
heap of living in those days. There really was. We
had an old piano. And when I won't tell you right
now, all of us would sit down and take our hand at it,
whether we played good or whether we didn't. We
enjoyed it. And that's what counts. My mother and
father had the most beautiful voices together
that ever was. Mother sang soprano and daddy sang
tenor. And mother was a pretty woman. And my daddy
was. a handsome man.
And I guess love makes them look prettier.
I guess the deep feeling that you have and the
respect you have for your parents, they just look
different to you than to anybody else. I don't
know, Mother just looked like a queen every time
she stepped out. And she was so erect in her walk and
so portly. And she held herself so well. She wasn't
slovenly in her walk. And her manner of dress was
always so very, very neat. Now the difference in
the two women and my mother and Lennon's mother
Lennon's mother was never needing her clothes.
Lennon was just exactly like her. God bless him.
His shirt tail would be out somewhere. And he had
nice clothes and everything. And he could, if you
just catch him just right before he got on the
stage, just push him on there and see that he's
ruined perfect. He'd be all right. But by the time
he got off of it, there'd be something wrong.
Really? Every time. But that's just the way with
people. It is. You know, I think it's, I think that.
And I think a lot of that rubbed off on me. I think so.
Well, eat all you want out of it. I'm hungry for good
food. You're hungry for food. Well, that's great.
Well, it's like, I agree there's nothing like the
kind of life that I, and I say we had here, as you know
I had, a great part of what you're talking about in
my home before my mother died. We came from this out
part of the country into Austin. And I had, as you
say, the napkins made out of shirt tails or
whatever was available and the rugs that
everybody just, if you couldn't pass it down
anymore, it ended up being ripped up for a rag rug.
Well, my goodness, I used to help my mother dye rugs
and, I mean, rags, make rugs out of. Yeah. And when
we were at the ranch, we had a... excuse me, 14 by 16
bedroom. Two double beds in it and a big stove,
heater. And that's where we, and a cot. And we all
slept in there because it's so cold. And we had
single wall. Oh, that single wall construction.
Absolutely. Papa put a big old green stick of wood
in that heater or an old
cedar log and get up and fire it up again in the night
and kept it warm. And we kept warm. And we'd sleep in
there. And Mama made a rug to cover that whole room
and made it on a loom over here at Blanco. out of old
rags. Old rags. And they were dyed in different
colors, and she made
striping. Yeah. And she used a lot of red, and it was
pretty. Those kinds of things, if women had to do
them today, they just wouldn't be able to handle a
lot. No, they wouldn't do it. Boy, we knew better
than to spill anything, get anything on that rug.
Now, that was something. Mm-hmm. The survival of
the family depended on the woman in most cases as
far as being sure that everything was done. It
wasn't a part of life. It wasn't, I hate to say this,
a lot of people would disagree, but it wasn't an ERA
fight between husband and wife. It was if one
didn't do her share or his share, it wasn't done.
And they're both laborious tasks. A lot of labor
combined between both people to simply survive
back then. Now, I want to tell you right now, I've
seen my mother sit on a cultivator all day long and
cook dinner. And when she'd go to the house to cook
dinner, I'd get through hoeing at the end, and I'd
get on the cultivator. And I'd make the rounds and
come back. And then she'd come back and take it
over. That cultivator didn't stop. Do you think
today that you'd take a seven-year-old girl and
put her on a cultivator driving a span of mules?
Why? Oh, she'd get killed if something happened.
Yeah. Yeah. But it wasn't that way. You had to do it
to get the job done again. Why? Good night. Well,
Ava, I think that that's the thing that I want
people to hear about. Just keep going and tell me
everything you can remember of value to you. Those
things are worth more to me than anything that I can
think of. Oh, of course. Now, I'm glad that we live
in a time that the girls and the women didn't have to
do it. But many a time... uh i drive four mules to a
triple disc plow now you didn't have many crippled
this plow in those days you had double discs but
very few cripples yeah that's a hard one and that
was that was a hard one to pull in a big one but we had
um grandpa and uncle buddy and my daddy bought one
together yeah and that's the way we we would share
well all right tom you do yours first and then Jay,
you take it. And then they'd all fly in and help
Grandpa Chapman because he was older and no one to
help him at that time. And the men would help. But
Daddy would never let that thing stop. I would plow
Margaret would plow, Mama would plow, and he would
plow. My daddy had sciatic rheumatism and was to
the point where he couldn't walk at all at one time.
And they say it was from riding on that hard steel
plow and jolting it and hurting it, whether it was
or whether it wasn't. He and Mother made a cushion,
but they didn't help. He just had sciatic nerve
trouble and just couldn't do it. But anyway, we all
worked at it. I wouldn't take for knowing how to
drive up. for mules. It's something that you
understand and something that's worth
something. Now, no, it isn't worth anything. It
may be, if things keep going like they're going, we
may be back in the same old hill. My grandfather
used to say that. My grandfather said that the day
would come that we'd have everything. Come in!
That it would all... Turn right around.
We're doing some homework. The main thing that I
appreciate my parents as much or more than
anything was the routine that we had. Of course, we
lived so far and had to ride the school horseback.
Right. And open gates. But it wasn't on until we...
learn to open gates by making a horse ride up to the
gate and reaching over and undoing it and staying
on the horse and closing the gate. But the
responsibility of caring for that horse, get up
and feed that horse before breakfast, And then the
minute that breakfast was over, you go saddle that
horse and bring it down here and tie it to the fence.
Then put on your school clothes and mother will
have your lunch ready and beat it. You get ready for
school. When I say beat it, you didn't have any time
to do anything. But every night you shucked that
corn and you nubbed it. When I say nub it, you took
every bit of it. off of the end of the ears, and you
put it over here in a bucket, and you'd throw it out
to the chickens. If there was any good there,
they'd get it, and if it wasn't, it would make good
manure. So out it went outside. But you shucked
that corn at night for your hogs, your chickens,
your turkeys, and your horse, and you put it in a
box, but you nubbed every bit of it. You didn't feed
a hog a bunch of old smutty corn and stuff like that.
You fed him good stuff. And we had a grinder that you
put your corn in, and they'd take it off of the cob
and you'd grind it. You'd stack those cobs in a neat
stack. Every night you took six cobs into the
house. One of them you put in a can that had a little
bit of kerosene in it that you would put in to start
the fire the next morning. And then you used three
or four, as Kenley liked to, under your wood, split
wood, to start your fire. But that was routine, and
if that wasn't done, then mother and dad called you
in and you really got a good little spanking. And I
mean, it was bridal reins and it hurt. And you knew
better. And you understood that it was something
that you had to do. And you milked the cows, you
gathered the eggs, you shut the chickens up, Then
you came in, washed your hands, ate your supper,
and got your lessons. It wasn't come in and sit down
and watch television and play. No, sir. There was
work to do. And you did it. And then, well, all me
alive, I was milking cows when I was five years old.
And I can prove that by anybody that knows me in this
country. Show me a five-year-old kid they're
getting a cow pen now with a bunch of cows. That's
right. They're scared they're going to get
stepped on. They're afraid, and they don't trust
their children. They give them no
responsibility. And what is wrong? Adults don't
trust children. What's wrong with the world today
is they have no confidence in their children. Oh, I
don't want him to have to work like I did. Listen,
that's wrong. He needs that responsibility. He
needs to know where that dollar came from. He needs
to understand that he doesn't grow on trees.
How many times have I come to town on Saturday and
feed cotton, bales of cotton up, gin down here. Rub
that old gin thing around in a bale of cotton. Let it
suck it up. Just a kid. Oh, no. Oh, that thing had
sucked that child up. It had hurt it. It had killed
it. It had knocked it down. That was the way it was.
That was survival. That was life. That was life.
That was life. and pick up peach seeds and take them
to town and sell them. Wash medicine bottles and
take them to the drug store and sell them. For a
penny. That's right. That's the way we'd get our
spending money. Really? Would a kid do that today?
No. He wouldn't pick up peach seeds and wash them
off and put them in a box and go sell them. No. That's
right. No, they wouldn't. No, they wouldn't. They
may pick up a beer can. They may pick up a soda water
can, but we didn't even have soda water.
Right. That's valuable to me, Ava. I agree with
times have changed so much, and kids are cheated.
Children are really cheated out of the
responsibility that they could assume when
they're little bitty and growing. You know, they
could be doing things that make them pleased with
themselves. Children are cheated in more ways
than one. It's true. I was brought up in a time and
the age that little folks were seen and not heard.
But we had ears and we listened. And we learned. We
learned. We were not sent to our room unless we
misbehaved and didn't listen while they were
talking. Then we were sent to our room. But we could
sit there, and I'm telling you, I wasn't 12 years
old, and I know it. And I would sit in the room and
listen to Uncle Clarence Martin, who was district
judge and district prosecuting attorney and all
that for this country. And Uncle Sam was in the
legislature. And my daddy was just a rancher. But
they would talk over politics of what's happening
in the world. As I said, we had no newspaper. But
they were in the towns where they could get the
news. Well, I knew who was governor. I knew who was
our congressman. I will grant you, right today,
you can walk downtown and pick out any bunch of kids
you want to, unless they're in high school. They
couldn't tell you who was even governor of Texas or
who was president. They care less. That's true.
But they can tell you what Mickey Mouse is doing.
Yeah, that's true. What Michael Jackson's doing.
That's what they can tell you. Yes. And their
greatest ambition in life is to get to sin. That's
right. Instead of valuing their own individual
self, and growing because they know what it means
to learn and grow. They haven't been taught. Kids
haven't been taught how to learn and grow. And the
thing I can remember, I guess, the most at that
particular time was the greatest event and joy
that I had
was when Teddy Roosevelt came through Austin with
his Rough Riders going to going to the border.
Yeah. Do you know that my daddy and Uncle Sam loaded
us up in an old Model T car? Took us five hours to go
from here to Austin in that Model T. And every creek
we stopped, we had to fill it up with water. It'd
boil out. It'd be so hot. The roads were so rough. No
pavement. Not even a good wagon road, hardly. And
jolt, oh, that's the roughest riding thing. You
really needed spurs to stay in it. But we got there,
and...
We stayed at the Cabinets House. The Cabinets,
yes. You know where that is. That's right. We
stayed at the Cabinets House. And I believe that
that avenue was the most beautiful thing I ever saw
in my life. You know, the post used to go right up the
center of the street and had the lights in a diamond
shape. And they lit them up. And I had never seen
electric lights like that. Oh, yeah. All the
lights that I had ever seen had been a carbide light
that was up at Uncle Clarence's, other than a
kerosene light like we had never seen electric
light. I didn't know what one looked like. And when
I saw those beautiful lights, I just stopped.
still just dead still and I asked my daddy what they
were because they were in colors red white and blue
and he told me now you can imagine what what a great
big old girl I thought about first time she'd ever
seen electric yeah And I thought that was the most
wonderful thing that ever was. Well, Uncle Sam
took us to the Capitol, showed us where his seat
was, showed us the chamber and the legislature,
all about it, explained it to us. And we knew, of
course. come back. And I'm telling you, Uncle
Clarence Martin then bought us all a pair of new
shoes. And it's patent leather. I'll tell you,
what was that? Well, it's a Jew store there on 6th
Street. Not Scarborough's, was it? No, not
Scarborough's. Scarborough's was on the Avenue
then. Oh, on 6th Street. Oh, Gilliman's.
Gilliman's. Okay, I've seen that one. Yeah,
Gilliman's on Fifth Street. And we went in there,
and just above Gilliman was Joe Cohen, a jeweler.
Right. And he bought Margaret and I a little ring,
and James, Eddie, and Lyndon a ring. Now, I don't
know why in the world Rebecca and Joseph are at
Lyndon's sister's. I think because Aunt Rebecca
didn't want them to go, but we went to Lyndon. And I
don't really know, but they never did associate
with us in doing things like that. And he bought us
all a little ring at Joe Cohen's. Yeah, that's the
prettiest thing he ever looked at. But anyway, he
bought us patent leather shoes. And mine was black
with white tops. And Marv's was black with red
tops, kid's skin tops. And we'd walk up and down
that pavement. And Lennon's was black patent
leather with,
well, they were lace shoes. Uh-huh. Not worthy or
worthy button. I believe his is button. I believe
his is button shoes. I believe James Ealy's is
button. They both rather have the buttons than the
lace because they come undone. And I believe they
both had button shoes. Well, anyway, we walked on
up to...
What was that big old drugstore up there? Oh. Oh.
Just sure look. I know. It was an old keep. Not
King's. Well, I can't think of it right now, but
anyway. Where was it about a... Up above
Scarborough. Up above, yeah, I know. That great
big drugstore. Great big drugstore. And we went up
there and stayed at this drugstore for a while. And
he told the man he was going to go see something,
somebody on up further. And he went to the counter
and he says, feed those kids all the ice cream or
anything they want to drink and let them sit here.
Well, boy, we filled up. Don't think we didn't. We
ate ice cream and Lennon got a banana split. Of
course, we'd never seen a banana split and didn't
know what one was like. And oh my goodness, when
they brought that out to Lennon, well, I'll never
forget. He ate every bit of it, but he'd already
eaten a big bowl of ice cream. And poor little fella
really got sick. He just got too... much and it was
too hot a day and he really got sick and he said well
and oh and he says now i'm going down and then i'll
tom will pick you up that is my daddy will pick you up
and so daddy came by and picked us up. And he said,
well, I want to go down to Leonard E.'s wagon yard
and see how much they're paying for turkeys and
chickens, because I've got to bring them down next
week or two to market. And so we walked on from
wherever this drug store was, which is way up above
Scarborough's and is up above Woolworth's. Any
other time I could think of. I know. I can see it from
the pictures I remember. But I can't tell you. But
anyway, and women say, well. It's a good history.